Add documentation for how to setup and use DPC++ with PoCL (#1837)
pocl/pocl: doc/sphinx/source/sycl_dpcpp.rst

==========================================
Using PoCL as the OpenCL backend for DPC++
==========================================

> SYCL is programming model that enables single-source C++ development for

Reviewer: ```suggestion
SYCL is a programming model that enables single-source C++ development for
```
Check grammar.

Author: Fixed.

heterogenous computing. Compared to OpenCL, SYCL operates at a higher level
of abstraction, relying on lower-level implementations like OpenCL for device
offloading.

> If the OpenCL backend is used, the SYCL runtime translates the SYCL API calls

Reviewer: Check when writing about DPC++ and SYCL. A runtime might or might not support OpenCL/SPIR-V. Initially it was a must, but they diverged in this front and it's not required to be a layer on OpenCL.

into corresponding OpenCL API calls and forwards them to the OpenCL runtime.

> DPC++ is Intel's implementation of SYCL, and the toolchain flow is as follows:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
DPC++ is Intel's implementation of SYCL, and the toolchain flow, when PoCL is used as the OpenCL backend is as follows:
```

Author: Fixed.

- The DPC++ Clang++ frontend compiles the SYCL kernel into LLVM IR.
- ``llvm-spirv`` is used to translate LLVM IR to SPIR-V.
- SPIR-V is ingested by PoCL, where it is translated back into LLVM IR.
- PoCL applies additional transformations to the LLVM IR.

> - If using CPU driver, PoCL leverages ``llc`` (LLVM backend) to lower the kernel to machine code.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- If using a CPU driver, PoCL leverages ``llc`` (LLVM backend) to lower the kernel to machine code.
```

Author: Fixed.

This page covers the following steps:

> - How to obtain, install, and set up DPC++ (Proprietary or open-source version)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- How to obtain, install, and set up DPC++ (the proprietary or the open-source version)
```

Author: Fixed.

- How to build PoCL to support DPC++.
- Verification with an example program.

> Propietary oneAPI DPC++ installation

Reviewer: It's "Intel(R) oneAPI DPC++/C++ Compiler" while the open-source C++ compiler is "oneAPI DPC++/C++ Compiler". Just somewhere state the former is binary distributed with Intel-only-known modifications and latter open source.

Author: Done.

Author: I'm stating their respective official names and using those in the subtitles. Other than that, I'm sticking with 'proprietary' and 'open-source' because it makes it easier to follow. Do you agree?

------------------------------------

DPC++ is available with various bundles, but the oneAPI Base Toolkit is a safe bet:

https://www.intel.com/content/www/us/en/developer/tools/oneapi/base-toolkit-download.html

There are multiple ways to obtain the installer. For the offline GUI installer (check the website above for the latest version)::

>     wget https://registrationcenter-download.intel.com/akdlm/IRC_NAS/dfc4a434-838c-4450-a6fe-2fa903b75aa7/intel-oneapi-base-toolkit-2025.0.1.46_offline.sh

Reviewer: The URL seems like it will break soon. Perhaps we should not copy the instructions for DPC++ installation here, but just link to a landing page in the Intel site?

Author: Agree, changed it.

Now, DPC++ should be set up. This can be verified by checking the available SYCL backends (In this example, Intel OpenCL was detected). ::

    sycl-ls
    [opencl:cpu][opencl:0] Intel(R) OpenCL, AMD Ryzen Threadripper 2990WX 32-Core Processor OpenCL 3.0 (Build 0) [2024.18.12.0.05_160000]
    [opencl:gpu][opencl:1] Intel(R) OpenCL Graphics, Intel(R) Arc(TM) A770 Graphics OpenCL 3.0 NEO  [23.43.027642]

The initialization script also adds the compiler to the ``PATH``::

    icpx --version
    Intel(R) oneAPI DPC++/C++ Compiler 2025.0.4 (2025.0.4.20241205)

Open-source DPC++ installation
------------------------------
The sources for the open-source DPC++ compiler can be obtained from `DPC++ repository <https://github.com/intel/llvm>`__.

Official detailed instructions can be found `here <https://intel.github.io/llvm-docs/GetStartedGuide.html#build-dpc-toolchain>`__.
The build process is managed using two Python scripts: ``configure.py`` and ``compile.py``, which handle most of the heavy lifting.
The ``configure.py`` is essentially a wrapper for **CMake**, so checking its contents can provide further details.

For a basic setup, run::

>     git clone git@github.com:intel/llvm.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    git clone git@github.com:intel/llvm
```
Right?

Author: Yup

    cd llvm
    python3 ./buildbot/configure.py -o <path-to-dpcpp-installation>
    python3 ./buildbot/compile.py -o <path-to-dpcpp-installation> -j <number-of-threads>

After building, export the compiler and SYCL runtime library paths::

    export PATH=<path-to-dpcpp-installation>/bin:$PATH
    export LD_LIBRARY_PATH=<path-to-dpcpp-installation>/lib:$LD_LIBRARY_PATH

**Note:** The open-source DPC++ compiler driver is ``clang++``, not ``icpx``.

::

    which clang++
    <path-to-dpcpp-installation>/bin/clang++

Building PoCL for DPC++
-----------------------
PoCL doesn't normally require ``llvm-spirv``, but in this case, it is a strict

> dependency because PoCL needs to convert SPIR-V back to LLVM IR.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
dependency because PoCL needs to convert the SPIR-V DPC++ produces back to LLVM IR.
```

Pay attention to LLVM and ``llvm-spirv`` versions:

> - DPC++ includes its own ``llvm-spirv`` which is typically the latest version (Do not use it with PoCL - it is meant for internal use by DPC++).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- DPC++ includes its own ``llvm-spirv`` which is typically the latest version. It cannot be used with PoCL, it is meant for internal use by DPC++.
```

Author: Fixed.

- You need a separate build of ``llvm-spirv`` checked out from the branch that corresponds to the LLVM version PoCL uses as its kernel compiler.
- These two versions of ``llvm-spirv`` should be reasonably close to each other, but they do not have to be an exact match.

For example, if DPC++ ``llvm-spirv`` is based on **LLVM 21**, and the PoCL kernel
compiler uses **LLVM 18**, then ``llvm-spirv`` should be checked out from the 'llvm_release_180' branch.

Example PoCL build::

    git clone git@github.com:pocl/pocl.git
    cd pocl
    mkdir build && cd build
    cmake .. -DCMAKE_INSTALL_PREFIX=<path-to-installation-directory> -DLLVM_SPIRV=<path-to-llvm-spirv> -DWITH_LLVM_CONFIG=<path-to-llvm-config>

The final step is to make PoCL visible to ICD loader::

    export OCL_ICD_VENDORS=<path-to-pocl-installation>/etc/OpenCL/vendors

Compiling with DPC++ using PoCL as the backend
----------------------------------------------
If using proprietary DPC++, there are a few additional steps. Proprietary DPC++

> expects the Intel OpenCL runtime so we have to make PoCL appear as one::

Reviewer: ```suggestion
expects the Intel OpenCL runtime so we have to make PoCL fake itself as one::
```

Author: I'm leaning to 'pretend' as well.

is utilized, the DPC++ runtime translates SYCL API calls into corresponding OpenCL
API calls and forwards them to the OpenCL runtime.

The toolchain flow, when PoCL is used as the OpenCL backend for DPC++, is as follows:

- The DPC++ Clang++ frontend compiles the SYCL kernel into LLVM IR.
- ``llvm-spirv`` is used to translate LLVM IR to SPIR-V.
- SPIR-V is ingested by PoCL, where it is translated back into LLVM IR.
- PoCL applies additional transformations to the LLVM IR.
- If using a CPU driver, PoCL leverages ``llc`` (LLVM backend) to lower the kernel to machine code.

It should be pointed out that there are two versions of DPC++:

- the **Intel(R) oneAPI DPC++/C++ Compiler**
- the **oneAPI DPC++/C++ Compiler**.

The former is proprietary and thus distributed in binary form, whereas the latter is
open-source.

This page covers the following steps:

- How to obtain, install, and set up DPC++ (the proprietary or the open-source version)
- How to build PoCL to support DPC++.
- Verification with an example program.

Intel(R) oneAPI DPC++/C++ Compiler installation
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

> DPC++ is available in various bundles, but the oneAPI Base Toolkit is a safe bet.

Author: I agree.

Choose a suitable installer from:

https://www.intel.com/content/www/us/en/developer/tools/oneapi/base-toolkit-download.html

Run the installer. The page above provides corresponding instructions for the selected installer.
Pay attention to the default installation path and choose a suitable one if necessary.

> The oneAPI Base Toolkit includes various components, some of which are not needed.

Author: Good correction.

For a minimal setup, pick:

- Intel oneAPI DPC++ Library
- Intel oneAPI DPC++/C++ compiler
- Intel Distribution for GDB (Required by the compiler)
- Intel oneAPI Threading Building Blocks (Required by the compiler)
- Intel oneAPI Math Kernel Library (Useful, but not required)

After installation, run the initialization script to set environment variables (This must be done in every new shell session unless added to ``.bashrc``)::

>     source <path-to-oneapi-installation>/setvars.sh

Author: Yeah, good point!

Now, DPC++ should be set up. This can be verified by checking the available SYCL backends (In this example, Intel OpenCL was detected). ::

>     sycl-ls

Author: Yep. Leaving it as is for consistency, since the PoCL documentation does not use it.

    [opencl:cpu][opencl:0] Intel(R) OpenCL, AMD Ryzen Threadripper 2990WX 32-Core Processor OpenCL 3.0 (Build 0) [2024.18.12.0.05_160000]
    [opencl:gpu][opencl:1] Intel(R) OpenCL Graphics, Intel(R) Arc(TM) A770 Graphics OpenCL 3.0 NEO  [23.43.027642]

The initialization script also adds the compiler to the ``PATH``::

    icpx --version
    Intel(R) oneAPI DPC++/C++ Compiler 2025.0.4 (2025.0.4.20241205)

oneAPI DPC++/C++ Compiler installation
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

> The sources for the open-source DPC++ compiler can be obtained from `DPC++ repository <https://github.com/intel/llvm>`__.

Author: Fixed.

After building, export the compiler and SYCL runtime library paths::

    export PATH=<path-to-dpcpp-installation>/bin:$PATH
    export LD_LIBRARY_PATH=<path-to-dpcpp-installation>/lib:$LD_LIBRARY_PATH

**Note:** The open-source DPC++ compiler driver is ``clang++``, not ``icpx``.

::

    which clang++
    <path-to-dpcpp-installation>/bin/clang++

Building PoCL for DPC++
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~
PoCL doesn't normally require ``llvm-spirv``, but in this case, it is a strict
dependency because PoCL needs to convert the SPIR-V produced by DPC++ back to LLVM IR.

Pay attention to LLVM and ``llvm-spirv`` versions:

- DPC++ includes its own ``llvm-spirv`` which is typically the latest version. However, it cannot be used with PoCL, as it is meant for internal use by DPC++.
- You need a separate build of ``llvm-spirv`` checked out from the branch that corresponds to the LLVM version PoCL uses as its kernel compiler.
- These two versions of ``llvm-spirv`` should be reasonably close to each other, but they do not have to be an exact match.

For example, if DPC++ ``llvm-spirv`` is based on **LLVM 21**, and the PoCL kernel

> compiler uses **LLVM 18**, then ``llvm-spirv`` should be checked out from the 'llvm_release_180' branch.

Reviewer: Does DPC++ use llvm-spirv for SPIR-V input or just for output? I mean, does this problem go away after it switches to the LLVM-SPIRV backend instead?

> compiler uses **LLVM 18**, then ``llvm-spirv`` should be checked out from the 'llvm_release_180' branch.

Reviewer 2: > add a suffix to llvm-spirv to indicate the version of LLVM it is built

This is how Ubuntu/Debian ships their llvm-spirv binaries, and PoCL's CMake will search for `llvm-spirv-XYZ` preferably; but it also verifies that `<llvm-spirv-binary> --version` returns the same LLVM major as the libLLVM PoCL is built against.

> can POCL statically link with a library equivalent of llvm-spirv

Yes; unfortunately this doesn't work quite as well (on Ubuntu/Debian at least). The problem is that both headers & libLLVMSPIRV are in unversioned directories. This then causes bugs like #1824 because the both library & headers actually **are** LLVM-version dependent.

> compiler uses **LLVM 18**, then ``llvm-spirv`` should be checked out from the 'llvm_release_180' branch.

Author: Fixed.

Example PoCL build::

    git clone git@github.com:pocl/pocl.git
    cd pocl
    mkdir build && cd build
    cmake .. -DCMAKE_INSTALL_PREFIX=<path-to-installation-directory> -DLLVM_SPIRV=<path-to-llvm-spirv> -DWITH_LLVM_CONFIG=<path-to-llvm-config>

The final step is to make PoCL visible to ICD loader::

>     export OCL_ICD_VENDORS=<path-to-pocl-installation>/etc/OpenCL/vendors

Author: Yeah, I agree that general instructions on this would be beneficial. For now, I made a compromise and referred Ocl ICD loader instructions for the setup. Would it be ok to to open a new issue for this matter and handle it sometime soonish, or do you think it should be dealt with now @pjaaskel?

Compiling with DPC++ using PoCL as the backend
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~
If using proprietary DPC++, there are a few additional steps. Proprietary DPC++
expects the Intel OpenCL runtime, so we need to make PoCL pretend to be one::

    unset OCL_ICD_FILENAMES
    export POCL_DRIVER_VERSION_OVERRIDE=2023.16.7.0.21_160000

>     export POCL_CPU_VENDOR_ID_OVERRIDE=32902

Reviewer: Sounds better. I didn't know it's possible to expand the allowed list this way.

>     export POCL_CPU_VENDOR_ID_OVERRIDE=32902

Reviewer 3: I think we should improve the documentation for `SYCL_DEVICE_ALLOWLIST` as well.  @bashbaug, do you know who designed/implemented that feature?

The documentation seems to suggest that the allow list needs all the fields, so my first test was a really complicated string:
```
SYCL_DEVICE_ALLOWLIST="BackendName:opencl,DeviceType:cpu,DeviceVendorId:0x10006,DriverVersion:{{version-number-including-a-git-hash}}"
```

It worked, but so does this:
```
SYCL_DEVICE_ALLOWLIST="DeviceVendorId:0x10006"
```

Surprisingly, even this works:
```
SYCL_DEVICE_ALLOWLIST=""
```

PoCL is only blocked if `SYCL_DEVICE_ALLOWLIST` isn't set at all, or if it's set to include a value that PoCL doesn't match.  So it is working, just not the way I would have expected.

>     export POCL_CPU_VENDOR_ID_OVERRIDE=32902

Author: Yes, this is much more handier way to deal with the setup.
